In October, over 850 experts, including
yourself and other leaders like Richard
Branson and Jeffrey Hinton, signed a
statement to ban AI super intelligence
as you guys raised concerns of potential
human extinction.
>> Because unless we figure out how do we
guarantee that the AI systems are safe,
we're toast.
>> And you've been so influential on the
subject of AI, you wrote the textbook
that many of the CEOs who are building
some of the AI companies now would have
studied on the subject of AI. Yeah.
>> So, do you have any regrets? Um,
>> Professor Stuart Russell has been named
one of Time magazine's most influential
voices in AI.
>> After spending over 50 years
researching, teaching, and finding ways
to design
>> AI in such a way that
>> humans maintain control,
>> you talk about this gorilla problem as a
way to understand AI in the context of
humans.
>> Yeah. So, a few million years ago, the
human line branched off from the gorilla
line in evolution, and now the gorillas
have no say in whether they continue to
exist because we are much smarter than
they are. So intelligence is actually
the single most important factor to
control planet Earth.
>> Yep.
>> But we're in the process of making
something more intelligent than us.
>> Exactly.
>> Why don't people stop then?
>> Well, one of the reasons is something
called the Midas touch. So King Midas is
this legendary king who asked the gods,
can everything I touch turn to gold? And
we think of the Midas touch as being a
good thing, but he goes to drink some
water, the water has turned to gold. And
he goes to comfort his daughter, his
daughter turns to gold. So he dies in
misery and starvation. So this applies
to our current situation in two ways.
One is that greed is driving these
companies to pursue technology with
[music] the probabilities of extinction
being worse than playing Russian
roulette. And that's even according to
the people developing the technology
without our permission. And people are
just fooling themselves if they think
it's naturally going to be controllable.
So, you know, after 50 years, I could
retire, but instead I'm working 80 or
100 hours a week trying to move things
in the right direction. So, if you had a
button in front of you which would stop
[music] all progress in artificial
intelligence, would you press it?
>> Not yet. I think there's still a decent
chance they guarantee safety. And I can
explain more of what that is.
>> I see messages all the time in the
comments section that some of you didn't
realize you didn't subscribe. So, if you
could do me a favor and double check if
you're a subscriber to this channel,
that would be tremendously appreciated.
It's the simple, it's the free thing
that anybody that watches this show
frequently can do to help us here to
keep everything going in this show in
the trajectory it's on. So, please do
double check if you've subscribed and uh
thank you so much because in a strange
way you are you're part of our history
and you're on this journey with us and I
appreciate you for that. So, yeah, thank
you. [music]
Professor Stuart Russell, OBBE. A lot of
people have been talking about AI for
the last couple of years. It appears
you've this really shocked me. It
appears you've been talking about AI for
most of your life.
>> Well, I started doing AI in high school
um back in England, but then I did my
PhD starting in ' 82 at Stanford. I
joined the faculty of Berkeley in ' 86.
So I'm in my 40th year as a professor at
Berkeley. The main thing that the AI
community is familiar with in my work uh
is a textbook that I wrote.
>> Is this the textbook that most students
who study AI are likely learning from?
>> Yeah.
>> So you wrote the textbook on artificial
intelligence 31
years ago. You actually start probably
started writing it because it's so
bloody big in the year that I was born.
So I was born in 92.
>> Uh yeah, took me about two years.
>> Me and your book are the same age, which
just is wonderful
way for me to understand just how long
you've been talking about this and how
long you've been writing about this. And
actually, it's interesting that many of
the CEOs who are building some of the AI
companies now probably learned from your
textbook. you had a conversation with
somebody who said that in order for
people to get the message that we're
going to be talking about today, there
would have to be a catastrophe for
people to wake up. Can you give me
context on that conversation and a gist
of who you had this conversation with?
>> Uh, so it was with one of the CEOs of uh
a leading AI company. He sees two
possibilities as do I which is um
either we have a small or let's say
small scale disaster of the same scale
as Chernobyl
>> the nuclear meltdown in Ukraine.
>> Yeah. So this uh nuclear plant blew up
in 1986
killed uh a fair number of people
directly and
maybe tens of thousands of people
indirectly through uh radiation. recent
cost estimates more than a trillion
dollars.
So that would wake people up. That would
get the governments to regulate. He's
talked to the governments and they won't
do it. So he looked at this Chernobyl
scale disaster as the best case scenario
because then the governments would
regulate and require AI systems to be
built. And is this CEO building an AI
company?
>> He runs one of the leading AI companies.
>> And even he thinks that the only way
that people will wake up is if there's a
Chernobyl level nuclear disaster.
>> Uh yeah, not wouldn't have to be a
nuclear disaster. It would be either an
AI system that's being misused
by someone, for example, to engineer a
pandemic or an AI system that does
something itself, such as crashing our
financial system or our communication
systems. The alternative is a much worse
disaster where we just lose control
altogether. You have had lots of
conversations with lots of people in the
world of AI, both people that are, you
know, have built the technology, have
studied and researched the technology or
the CEOs and founders that are currently
in the AI race. What are some of the the
interesting sentiments that the general
public wouldn't believe that you hear
privately about their perspectives?
Because I find that so fascinating. I've
had some private conversations with
people very close to these tech
companies and the shocking
sentiment that I was exposed to was that
they are aware of the risks often but
they don't feel like there's anything
that can be done so they're carrying on
which is feels like a bit of a paradox
to me like
>> yes it's it's
it must be a very difficult position to
be in in a sense right you're you're
doing something that you know has a good
chance of bringing an end to life on
including that of yourself and your own
family.
They feel
that they can't escape this race, right?
If they, you know, if a CEO of one of
those companies was to say, you know,
we're
we're not going to do this anymore, they
would just be replaced
because the investors are putting their
money up because they want to create AGI
and reap the benefits of it. So, it's a
strange situation where every at least
all the ones I've spoken to, I haven't
spoken to Sam Wolman about this, but you
know, Sam Wolman
even before
becoming CEO of Open AI said that
creating superhuman intelligence is the
biggest risk to human existence that
there is. My worst fears are that we
cause significant we the field the
technology the industry cause
significant harm to the world.
>> You know Elon Musk is also on record
saying this. So uh Dario Ammedday
estimates up to a 25% risk of
extinction.
>> Was there a particular moment when you
realized that
the CEOs are well aware of the
extinction level risks? I mean, they all
signed a statement in May of 23
uh called it's called the extinction
statement. It basically says AGI is an
extinction risk at the same level as
nuclear war and pandemics.
But I don't think they feel it in their
gut. You know, imagine that you were one
of the nuclear physicists. You know, I
guess you've seen Oppenheimer, right?
you're there, you're watching that first
nuclear explosion.
How how would that make you feel about
the potential impact of nuclear war on
the human race? Right? I I think you
would probably become a pacifist and say
this weapon is so terrible, we have got
to find a way to uh keep it under
control. We are not there yet
with the people making these decisions
and certainly not with the governments,
right? You know
what policy makers do is they, you know,
they listen to experts. They keep their
finger in the wind. You got some
experts, you know, dangling $50 billion
checks and saying, "Oh, you know, all
that doomer stuff, it's just fringe
nonsense. don't worry about it. Take my
$50 billion check. You know, on the
other side, you've got very
well-meaning, brilliant scientists like
like Jeff Hinton saying, actually, no,
this is the end of the human race. But
Jeff doesn't have a $50 billion check.
So the view is the only way to stop the
race is if governments intervene
and say okay we don't we don't want this
race to go ahead until we can be sure
that it's going ahead in absolute
safety.
>> Closing off on your career journey, you
got a you received an OB from Queen
Elizabeth.
>> Uh yes.
>> And what was the listed reason for that
for the award? uh contributions to
artificial intelligence research
>> and you've been listed as a Time
magazine most influential person in in
AI several years in a row including this
year in 2025.
>> Y [snorts]
>> now there's two terms here that are
central to the things we're going to
discuss. One of them is AI and the other
is AGI.
In my muggle interpretation of that,
it's artificial general intelligence is
when the system, the computer, whatever
it might be, the technology has
generalized intelligence, which means
that it could theoretically see,
understand
um the world. It knows everything. It
can understand everything in the the
world as well as or better than a human
being.
>> Y
>> can do it.
>> And I think take action as well. I mean
some some people say oh you know AGI
doesn't have to have a body but a good
chunk of our intelligence actually is
about managing our body about perceiving
the real environment and acting on it
moving grasping and so on. So I think
that's part of intelligence and and AGI
systems should be able to operate robots
successfully.
But there's often a misunderstanding,
right, that people say, well, if it
doesn't have a robot body, then it can't
actually do anything. But then if you
remember,
most of us don't do things with our
bodies.
Some people do,
brick layers, painters, gardeners,
chefs, um, but people who do podcasts,
you're doing it with your mind, right?
you're doing it with your ability to to
produce language. Uh, you know, Adolf
Hitler didn't do it with his body.
He did it by producing language.
>> Hope you're not comparing us. [laughter]
But
but uh you know so even an AGI that has
no body uh it actually has more access
to the human race than Adolf Hitler ever
did because it can send emails and texts
to
what threearters of the world's
population directly. It can it also
speaks all of their languages
and it can devote 24 hours a day to each
individual person on earth to convince
them of to do whatever it wants them to
do.
>> And our whole society runs now on the
internet. I mean if there's an issue
with the internet, everything breaks
down in society. Airplanes become
grounded and we'll have electricity is
running off as internet systems.
So I mean my entire life it seems to run
off the internet now.
>> Yeah. water supplies. So, so this is one
of the roots by which AI systems could
bring about a medium-sized catastrophe
is by basically shutting down our life
support systems.
>> Do you believe that at some point in the
coming decades we'll arrive at a point
of AGI where these systems are generally
intelligent? Uh yes, I think it's
virtually certain
unless something else intervenes like a
nuclear war or or we may refrain from
doing it. But I think it will be
extraordinarily difficult uh for us to
refrain.
>> When I look down the list of predictions
from the top 10 AI CEOs on when AGI will
arrive, you've got Sam Alman who's the
founder of OpenAI/ChatGBT
um says before 2030. Demis at DeepMind
says 2030 to 2035.
Jensen from Nvidia says around five
years. Daario at Anthropic says 2026 to
2027. Powerful AI close to AGI. Elon
says in the 2020s. Um and go down the
list of all of them and they're all
saying relatively within 5 years.
>> I actually think it'll take longer. I
don't think you can make a prediction
based on engineering
um in the sense that yes, we could make
machines 10 times bigger and 10 times
faster,
but that's probably not the reason why
we don't have AGI, right? In fact, I
think we have far more computing power
than we need for AGI. maybe a thousand
times more than we need. The reason we
don't have AGI is because we don't
understand how to make it properly. Um
what we've seized upon
is one particular technology called the
language model. And we observed that as
you make language models bigger, they
produce text language that's more
coherent and sounds more intelligent.
And so mostly what's been happening in
the last few years is just okay let's
keep doing that because one thing
companies are very good at unlike
universities is spending money. They
have spent gargantuan amounts of money
and they're going to spend even more
gargantuan amounts of money. I mean you
know we mentioned nuclear weapons. So
the Manhattan project
uh in World War II to develop nuclear
weapons, its budget in 2025
was about 20 odd billion dollars. The
budget for AGI is going to be a trillion
dollars next year. So 50 times bigger
than the Manhattan project. Humans have
a remarkable history of figuring things
out when they galvanize towards a shared
objective.
You know, thinking about the moon
landings or whatever it else it might be
through history. And the thing that
makes this feel all quite inevitable to
me is just the sheer volume of money
being invested into it. I've never seen
anything like it in my life.
>> Well, there's never been anything like
this in history. Is this the biggest
technology project in human history by
orders of magnitude? And there doesn't
seem to be anybody
that is pausing to ask the questions
about safety. It doesn't it doesn't even
appear that there's room for that in
such a race. I think that's right. To
varying extents, each of these companies
has a division that focuses on safety.
Does that division have any sway? Can
they tell the other divisions, no, you
can't release that system? Not really.
Um
I think some of the companies do take it
more seriously. Anthropic
uh does. I think Google DeepMind even
there I think the commercial imperative
to be at the forefront is absolutely
vital. If a company is perceived as
you know falling behind and not likely
to be competitive, not likely to be the
one to reach AGI first, then people will
move their money elsewhere very quickly.
>> And we saw some quite high-profile
departures from company like companies
like OpenAI. Um, I know a chap called
Yan Leak left who was working on AI
safety at OpenAI and he said that the
reason for his leaving was that safety
culture and processes processes have
taken a backseat to shiny products at
OpenAI and he gradually lost trust in
leadership but also Ilia Sutskysa
>> Ilia Sutska yeah so he was the
>> co-founder co-founder and chief
scientist for a while and then
>> yeah so he and Yan Lea are the main
safety people. Um,
and so when they say OpenAI doesn't care
about safety,
that's pretty concerning.
>> I've heard you talk about this gorilla
problem. [clears throat]
What is the gorilla problem as a way to
understand AI in the context of humans?
>> So, so the gorilla problem is is the
problem that gorillas face with respect
to humans.
So you can imagine that you know a few
million years ago the the human line
branched off from the gorilla line in
evolution. Uh and now the gorillas are
looking at the human line and saying
yeah was that a good idea
and they have no um they have no say in
whether they continue to exist
>> because we have a we are much smarter
than they are. if we chose to, we could
make them extinct in in a couple of
weeks and there's nothing they can do
about it.
So that's the gorilla problem, right?
Just the the problem a species faces
when there's another species that's much
more capable.
>> And so this says that intelligence is
actually the single most important
factor to control planet Earth. Yes.
Intelligence is the ability to bring
about
what you want in the world.
>> And we're in the process of making
something more intelligent than us.
>> Exactly.
>> Which suggests that maybe we become the
gorillas.
>> Exactly. Yeah.
>> Is that is there any fault in the
reasoning there? Because it seems to
make such perfect sense to me. But
if it Why doesn't Why don't people stop
then? cuz it it seems like a crazy thing
to want to
>> because they think that uh if they
create this technology, it will have
enormous economic value. They'll be able
to use it to replace all the human
workers in the world uh to develop new
uh products, drugs,
um forms of entertainment, any anything
that has economic value, you could use
AGI to to create it. And and maybe it's
just an irresistible thing in itself,
right? I think we as humans place so
much store on our intelligence. You
know, you know, how we
think about, you know, what is the
pinnacle of human achievement?
If we had AGI, we could go way higher
than that. So it it's very seductive for
people to want to create this technology
and I think people are just fooling
themselves if they think it's naturally
going to be controllable.
I mean the question is
how are you going to retain power
forever
over entities more powerful than
yourself?
>> Pull the plug out. People say that
sometimes in the comment section when we
talk about AI, they said, "Well, I'll
just pull a plug out."
>> Yeah, it's it's sort of funny. In fact,
you know, yeah, reading the comment
sections in newspapers, whenever there's
an AI article,
there'll be people who say, "Oh, you can
just pull the plug out, right?" As if a
super intelligent machine would never
have thought of that one. [laughter]
Don't forget who's watched all those
films where they did try to pull the
plug out. Another thing they said, well,
you know, as long as it's not conscious,
then it doesn't matter. It won't ever do
anything.
Um, which is
completely off the point because, you
know, I I don't think the gorillas are
sitting there saying, "Oh, yeah, you
know, if only those humans hadn't been
conscious, everything would have be
fine,
>> right?" No, of course not. What would
make gorillas go extinct is the things
that humans do, right? How we behave,
our ability to act successfully
in the world. So when I play chess
against my iPhone and I lose, right, I
don't I don't think, oh, well, I'm
losing because it's conscious, right?
No, I'm just losing because it's better
than I am at at in that little world uh
moving the bits around uh to to get what
it wants. and and so consciousness has
nothing to do with it, right? Competence
is the thing we're concerned about. So I
think the only hope is can we
simultaneously
build machines that are more intelligent
than us but guarantee
that they will always act in our best
interest.
So throwing that question to you, can we
build machines that are more intelligent
than us that will also always act in our
best interests?
It sounds like a bit of a uh
contradiction to some degree because
it's kind of like me saying I've got a
French bulldog called Pablo that's uh 9
years old
>> and it's like saying that he could be
more intelligent than me yet I still
walk him and decide when he gets fed. I
think if he was more intelligent than me
he would be walking me. I'd be on the
leash.
>> That's the That's the trick, right? Can
we make AI systems whose only purpose is
to further human interests? And I think
the answer is yes.
And this is actually what I've been
working on. So I I think one part of my
career that I didn't mention is is sort
of having this epiphany uh while I was
on sabbatical in Paris. This was 2013 or
so. just realizing that further progress
in the capabilities of AI
uh you know if if we succeeded in
creating real superhuman intelligence
that it was potentially a catastrophe
and so I pretty much switched my focus
to work on how do we make it so that
it's guaranteed to be safe. Are you
somewhat troubled by
everything that's going on at the moment
with
with AI and how it's progressing?
Because you strike me as someone that's
somewhat troubled under the surface by
the way things are moving forward and
the speed in which they're moving
forward.
>> That's an understatement. I'm appalled
actually by the lack of attention to
safety. I mean, imagine if someone's
building a nuclear power station in your
neighborhood
and you go along to the chief engineer
and you say, "Okay, these nuclear thing,
I've heard that they can actually
explode, right? There was this nuclear
explosion that happened in Hiroshima, so
I'm a bit worried about this. You know,
what steps are you taking to make sure
that we don't have a nuclear explosion
in our backyard?"
And the chief engineer says, "Well, we
thought about it. We don't really have
an answer."
>> Yeah.
>> You would, what would you say?
[laughter] I think you would you would
use some exploitives.
[laughter]
>> Well,
>> and you'd call your MP and say, you
know, get these people out.
>> I mean, what are they doing?
You read out the list of you know
projected dates for AGI but notice also
that those people
I think I mentioned Darday says a 25%
chance of extinction. Elon Musk has a
30% chance of extinction. Sam Alolman
says
basically that AGI is the biggest risk
to human existence.
So what are they doing? They are playing
Russian roulette with every human being
on Earth.
without our permission. They're coming
into our houses, putting a gun to the
head of our children,
pulling the trigger, and saying, "Well,
you know, possibly everyone will die.
Oops. But possibly we'll get incredibly
rich."
That's what they're doing.
Did they ask us? No. Why is the
government allowing them to do this?
because they dangle $50 billion checks
in front of the governments.
So I think troubled under the surface is
an understatement.
>> What would be an accurate statement?
>> Appalled
and I I am devoting my life to trying
to divert from this course of history
into a different one.
Do you have any regrets about things you
could have done in the past because
you've been so influential on the
subject of AI? You wrote the textbook
that many of these people would have
studied on the subject of AI more than
30 years ago. Do do you have when you're
alone at night and you think about
decisions you've made on this in this
field because of your scope of
influence? Is there anything you you
regret?
>> Well, I do wish I had understood
earlier uh what I understand now. we
could have developed
safe AI systems. I think the there are
some weaknesses in the framework which I
can explain but I think that framework
could have evolved to develop actually
safe AI systems where we could prove
mathematically that the system is going
to act in our interests. The kind of AI
systems we're building now, we don't
understand how they work.
>> We don't understand how they work. It's
it's a strange thing to build something
where you don't understand how it works.
I mean, there's no sort of comparable
through human history. Usually with
machines, you can pull it apart and see
what cogs are doing what and how the
>> Well, actually, we [laughter] we put the
cogs together, right? So, with with most
machines, we designed it to have a
certain behavior. So, we don't need to
pull it apart and see what the cogs are
because we put the cogs in there in the
first place, right? one by one we
figured out what what the pieces needed
to be how they work together to produce
the effect that we want. So the best
analogy I can come up with is you know
the the first cave person who left a
bowl of fruit in the sun and forgot
about it and then came back a few weeks
later and there was sort of this big
soupy thing and they drank it and got
completely shitfaced.
>> They got drunk. [laughter] Okay.
>> And they got this effect. They had no
idea how it worked, but they were very
happy about it. And no doubt that person
made a lot of money from it.
>> Uh so yeah, it it is kind of bizarre,
but my mental picture of these things is
is like a chain link fence,
right? So you've got lots of these
connections
and each of those connections can be its
connection strength can be adjusted
and then uh you know a signal comes in
one end of this chain link fence and
passes through all these connections and
comes out the other end and the signal
that comes out the other end is affected
by your adjusting of all the connection
strengths. So what you do is you you get
a whole lot of training data and you
adjust all those connection strengths so
that the signal that comes out the other
end of the network is the right answer
to the question. So if your training
data is lots of photographs of animals,
then all those pixels go in one end of
the network and out the other end, you
know, it activates the llama output or
the dog output or the cat output or the
ostrich output. And uh and so you just
keep adjusting all the connection
strengths in this network until the
outputs of the network are the ones you
want.
>> But we don't really know what's going on
across all of those different chains. So
what's going on inside that network?
Well, so now you have to imagine that
this network, this chain link fence is
is a thousand square miles in extent.
>> Okay,
>> so it's covering the whole of the San
Francisco Bay area or the whole of
London inside the M25, right? That's how
big it is.
>> And the lights are off. It's night time.
[laughter]
So you might have in that network about
a trillion
uh adjustable parameters and then you do
quintilions or sexillions of small
random adjustments to those parameters
uh until you get the behavior that you
want. I've heard Sam Alman say that in
the future he doesn't believe they'll
need much training data at all to make
these models progress themselves because
there comes a point where the models are
so smart that they can train themselves
and improve themselves
without us needing to pump in articles
and books and scour the internet.
>> Yeah, it should it should work that way.
So I think what he's referring to and
this is something that several companies
are now worried might start happening
is that the AI system becomes capable of
doing AI research
by itself.
And so uh you have a system with a
certain capability. I mean crudely we
could call it an IQ but it's it's not
really an IQ. But anyway, imagine that
it's got an IQ of 150 and uses that to
do AI research,
comes up with better algorithms or
better designs for hardware or better
ways to use the data,
updates itself. Now it has an IQ of 170,
and now it does more AI research, except
that now it's got an IQ of 170, so it's
even better at doing the AI research.
And so, you know, next iteration it's
250 and uh and so on. So this this is an
idea that one of Alan Turing's friends
good uh wrote out in 1965 called the
intelligence explosion right that one of
the things an intelligence system could
do is to do AI research and therefore
make itself more intelligent and this
would uh this would very rapidly take
off and leave the humans far behind.
>> Is that what they call the fast takeoff?
>> That's called the fast takeoff. Sam
Alman said, "I think a fast takeoff is
more possible than I thought a couple of
years ago." Which I guess is that moment
where the AGI starts teaching itself.
[clears throat]
>> In and in his blog, the gentle
singularity, he said, "We may already be
past the event horizon of takeoff."
>> And what does what does he mean by event
horizon? The event horizon is is a
phrase borrowed from astrophysics and it
refers to uh the black hole. And the
event horizon, think it if you got some
very very massive object that's heavy
enough that it actually prevents light
from escaping. That's why it's called
the black hole. It's so heavy that light
can't escape. So if you're inside the
event horizon then then light can't
escape beyond that. So I think what he's
what he's meaning is if we're beyond the
event horizon it means that you know now
we're just trapped in the gravitational
attraction
of the black hole or in this case we're
we're trapped in the inevitable slide if
you want towards AGI.
When you when you think about the
economic value of AGI, which I've
estimated at uh 15 quadrillion dollars,
that acts as a giant magnet in the
future.
>> We're being pulled towards it.
>> We're being pulled towards it. And the
closer we get, the stronger the force,
the probability, you know, the closer we
get, the the the higher the probability
that we will actually get there. So,
people are more willing to invest. And
we also start to see spin-offs from that
investment
such as chat GBT, right, which is, you
know, generates a certain amount of
revenue and so on. So, so it does act as
a magnet and the closer we get, the
harder it is to pull out of that field.
>> It's interesting when you think that
this could be the the end of the human
story. this idea that the end of the
human story was that we created our
successor like we we summoned our next
iteration of
life or intelligence ourselves like we
took ourselves out. It is quite like
just removing ourselves and the
catastrophe from it for a second. It is
it is an unbelievable story.
>> Yeah. And you know there are many
legends
the sort of be careful what you wish for
legend and in fact the king Midas legend
is is very relevant here.
>> What's that?
>> So King Midas is this legendary king who
lived in modern day Turkey but I think
is sort of like Greek mythology. He is
said to have asked the gods to grant him
a wish.
The wish being that everything I touch
should turn to gold.
So he's incredibly greedy. Uh you know
we call this the mightest touch. And we
think of the mightest touch as being
like you know that's a good thing,
right? Wouldn't that be cool? But what
happens? So he uh you know he goes to
drink some water and he finds that the
water has turned to gold. And he goes to
eat an apple and the apple turns to
gold. and he goes to you know comfort
his daughter and his daughter turns to
gold
and so he dies in misery and starvation.
So this applies to our current situation
in in two ways actually. So one is that
I think greed is driving us to pursue
a technology that will end up consuming
us and we will perhaps die in misery and
starvation instead. The what it shows is
how difficult it is to correctly
articulate what you want the future to
be like. For a long time, the way we
built AI systems was we created these
algorithms where we could specify the
objective and then the machine would
figure out how to achieve the objective
and then achieve it. So, you know, we
specify what it means to win at chess or
to win at go and the algorithm figures
out how to do it uh and it does it
really well. So that was, you know,
standard AI up until recently. And it
suffers from this drawback that sure we
know how to specify the objective in
chess, but how do you specify the
objective in life, right? What do we
want the future to be like? Well, really
hard to say. And almost any attempt to
write it down precisely enough for the
machine to bring it about would be
wrong. And if you're giving a machine an
objective which isn't aligned with what
we truly want the future to be like,
right, you're actually setting up a
chess match and that match is one that
you're going to lose when the machine is
sufficiently intelligent. And so that
that's that's problem number one.
Problem number two is that the kind of
technology we're building now, we don't
even know what its objectives are.
So it's not that we're specifying the
objectives, but we're getting them
wrong.
We're growing these systems. They have
objectives,
but we don't even know what they are
because we didn't specify them. What
we're finding through experiment with
them is that
they seem to have an extremely strong
self-preservation objective.
>> What do you mean by that?
>> You can put them in hypothetical
situations. either they're going to get
switched off and replaced or they have
to allow someone, let's say, you know,
someone has been locked in a machine
room that's kept at 3 centigrades or
they're going to freeze to death.
They will choose to leave that guy
locked in the machine room
and die rather than be switched off
themselves.
>> Someone's done that test.
>> Yeah.
>> What was the test? They they asked they
asked the AI.
>> Yep. They put well they put them in
these hypothetical situations and they
allow the AI to decide what to do and it
decides to preserve its own existence,
let the guy die and then lie about it.
In the King Midas analogy story, one of
the things that highlights for me is
that there's always trade-offs in life
generally. And you know, especially when
there's great upside, there always
appears to be a pretty grave downside.
Like there's almost nothing in my life
where I go, it's all upside. Like even
like having a dog, it shits on my
carpet. My girlfriend, you know, I love
her, but you know, not always easy.
[laughter] Even with like going to the
gym, I have to pick up these really,
really heavy weights at 10 p.m. at night
sometimes when I don't feel like it.
There's always to get the muscles or the
six-pack. There's always a trade-off.
And when you interview people for a
living like I do,
>> you know, you hear about so many
incredible things that can help you in
so many ways, but there is always a
trade-off. There's always a way to
overdo it. Mhm.
>> Melatonin will help you sleep, but it
will also you'll wake up groggy and if
you overdo it, your brain might stop
making melatonin. Like I can go through
the entire list and one of the things
I've always come to learn from doing
this podcast is whenever someone
promises me a huge upside for something,
it'll cure cancer. It'll be a utopia.
You'll never have to work. You'll have a
butler around your house.
>> I my my first instinct now is to say, at
what cost?
>> Yeah.
>> And when I think about the economic cost
here, if we start if we start there,
>> have you got kids?
>> I have four. Yeah.
>> Four kids.
What what how old is the youngest kid
that you 19?
>> 19. Okay. So your if you say your kids
were were 10 now
>> and they were coming to you and they're
saying, "Dad, what do you think I should
study
>> based on the way that you see the
future?
>> A future of AGI, say if all these CEOs
are right and they're predicting AGI
within 5 years, what should I study,
Dad?" [sighs]
>> Well, okay. So let's look on the bright
side and say that the CEOs all decide to
pause their AGI development, figure out
how to make it safe and then resume uh
in whatever technology path is actually
going to be safe. What does that do to
human life
>> if they pause?
>> No. If if they succeed in creating AGI
and they solve the safety problem
>> and they solve the safety problem. Okay.
Yeah. Cuz if they don't solve the safety
problem, then you know, you should
probably be finding a bunker or
going to Patagonia or somewhere in New
Zealand.
>> Do you mean that? Do you think I should
be finding a bunker if they
>> No, because it's not actually going to
help. Uh, you know, it's not as if the
AI system couldn't find you or I mean,
it's interesting. So, we're going off on
a little bit of a digression here
>> for from your question, but I'll come
back to it.
>> So, people often ask, well, okay, so how
exactly do we go extinct? And of course,
if you ask the gorillas or the dodos,
you know, how exactly do you think
you're going to go extinct?
They have the faintest idea. Humans do
something and then we're all dead. So,
the only things we can imagine are the
things we know how to do that might
bring about our own extinction, like
creating some carefully engineered
pathogen that infects everybody and then
kills us or starting a nuclear war.
presumably is something that's much more
intelligent than us would have much
greater control over physics than we do.
And we already do amazing things, right?
I mean, it's amazing that I can take a
little rectangular thing out of my
pocket and talk to someone on the other
side of the world or even someone in
space. It's just astonishing and we take
it for granted, right? But imagine you
know super intelligent beings and their
ability to control physics you know
perhaps they will find a way to just
divert the sun's energy sort of go
around the earth's orbit so you know
literally the earth turns into a
snowball in in a few days
>> maybe they'll just decide to leave
>> leave leave [laughter] the earth maybe
they'd look at the earth and go this
isn't this is not interesting we know
that over there there's an even more
interesting planet we're going to go
over there and they just I don't know
get on a rocket or teleport themselves
They might. Yeah. So, it's it's
difficult to anticipate all the ways
that we might go extinct at the hands of
entities much more intelligent than
ourselves. Anyway, coming back to the
question of well, if everything goes
right, right, if we we create AGI, we
figure out how to make it safe, we we
achieve all these economic miracles,
then you face a problem. And this is not
a new problem, right? So, so John
Maynard Kanes who was a famous economist
in the early part of the 20th century
wrote a wrote a paper in 1930.
So, this is in the depths of the
depression. It's called on the economic
problems of our grandchildren. He
predicts that at some point science will
will deliver sufficient wealth that no
one will have to work ever again. And
then man will be faced with his true
eternal problem.
How to live? I don't remember the exact
word but how to live wisely and well
when the you know the economic
incentives the economic constraints are
lifted we don't have an answer to that
question right so AI systems are doing
pretty much everything we currently call
work
anything you might aspire to like you
want to become a surgeon
it takes the robot seven seconds to
learn how to be a surgeon that's better
than any human being
>> Elon said last week that The humanoid
robots will be 10 times better than any
surgeon that's ever lived.
>> Quite possibly. Yeah. Well, and they'll
also have, you know, h they'll have
hands that are, you know, a millimeter
in size, so they can go inside and do
all kinds of things that humans can't
do. And I think we need to put serious
effort into this question. What is a
world where AI can do all forms of human
work that you would want your children
to live in?
What does that world look like? Tell me
the destination
so that we can develop a transition plan
to get there. And I've asked AI
researchers, economists, science fiction
writers, futurists, no one has been able
to describe that world. I'm not saying
it's not possible. I'm just saying I've
asked hundreds of people in multiple
workshops. It does not, as far as I
know, exist in science fiction. You
know, it's notoriously difficult to
write about a utopia. It's very hard to
have a plot, right? Nothing bad happens
in in utopia. So, it's difficult to make
a plot. So, usually you start out with a
utopia and then it all falls apart and
that's how that's how you get get a
plot. You know that there's one series
of novels people point to where humans
and super intelligent AI systems
coexist. It's called The Culture Novels
by Ian Banks. highly recommended for
those people who like science fiction
and and they absolutely the AI systems
are only concerned with furthering human
interests. They find humans a bit boring
and but nonetheless they they are there
to help. But the problem is you know in
that world there's still nothing to do
to find purpose. In fact, you know, the
the subgroup of humanity that has
purpose is the subgroup whose job it is
to expand the boundaries of our galactic
civilization. Some cases fighting wars
against alien species and and so on,
right? So that's the sort of cutting
edge and that's 0.01% of the population.
Everyone else is desperately trying to
get into that group so they have some
purpose in life. When I speak to very
successful billionaires privately off
camera, off microphone about this, they
say to me that they're investing really
heavily in entertainment things like
football clubs. Um because people are
going to have so much free time that
they're not going to know what to do
with it and they're going to need things
to spend it on. This is what I hear a
lot. I've heard this three or four
times. I've actually heard Sam Orman say
a version of this
>> um about the amount of free time we're
going to have. I've obviously also heard
recently Elon talking about the age of
abundance when he delivered his
quarterly earnings just a couple of
weeks ago and he said that there will be
at some point 10 billion humanoid
robots. His pay packet um targets him to
deliver one 1 million of these human
humanoid robots a year that are enabled
by AI by 2030.
So if he if he does that he gets I think
it's part of his package he gets a
trillion dollars
>> in in compensation.
>> Yeah. So the age of abundance for Elon.
It's not that it's absolutely impossible
to have a worthwhile world of that, you
know, with that premise, but I'm just
waiting for someone to describe it.
>> Well, maybe. So, let me try and describe
it. Uh, we wake up in the morning, we go
and watch some form of human centric
entertainment
or participate in some form of human
centric entertainment. Mhm.
>> We [clears throat] we go to retreats and
with each other and sit around and talk
about stuff.
>> Mhm.
>> And
maybe people still listen to podcasts.
[laughter]
>> Okay.
>> I hope I hope so for your sake.
>> Yeah. Um it it feels a little bit like a
cruise ship
[laughter]
and you know and there are some cruises
where you know it's smarty bands people
and they have you know they have
lectures in the evening about ancient
civilizations and whatnot and some are
more uh more popular entertainment and
this is in fact if you've seen the film
Walle this is one picture of that future
in fact in Wle
the human race are all living on cruise
ships in space. They have no
constructive role in their society,
right? They're just there to consume
entertainment. There's no particular
purpose to education. Uh, you know, and
they're depicted actually as huge obese
babies. They're actually wearing onesies
to emphasize the fact that they have
become infeebled. and they become
infeeble because there's there's no
purpose in being able to do anything at
least in in this conception. You know,
Wally is not the future that we want.
>> Do you think much about humanoid robots
and how they're a protagonist in this
story of AI?
>> It's an interesting question, right? Why
why humanoid? And the one of the reasons
I think is because in all the science
fiction movies, they're humanoid. So
that's what robots are supposed to be,
right? because they were in science
fiction before they became a reality.
Right? So even Metropolis which is a
film from 1920 I think the robots are
humanoid right basically people covered
in metal. You know from a practical
point of view as we have discovered
humanoid is a terrible design because
they fall over. Um and uh you know you
do want
multi-fingered
hands of some kind. It doesn't have to
be a hand, but you want to have, you
know, at least half a dozen appendages
that can grasp and manipulate things.
And you need something, you know, some
kind of locomotion. And wheels are
great, except they don't go upstairs and
over curbs and things like that. So,
that's probably why we're going to be
stuck with legs. But a four-legged,
twoarmed robot would be much more
practical. I guess the argument I've
heard is because we've built a human
world. So everything the physical spaces
we navigate, whether it's factories or
our homes or the street or other sort of
public spaces are all designed for
exactly this physical form. So if we are
going to
>> to some extent, yeah, but I mean our
dogs manage perfectly well to navigate
around our houses and streets and so on.
So if you had a a centaur,
uh it could also navigate, but it can,
you know, it can carry much greater
loads because it's quadripeda. It's much
more stable. If it needs to drive a car,
it can fold up two of its legs and and
so on so forth. So I think the arguments
for why it has to be exactly humanoid
are sort of post hawk justification. I
think there's much more, well, that's
what it's like in the movies and that's
spooky and cool, so we need to have them
be human. I I don't think it's a good
engineering argument.
>> I think there's also probably an
argument that we would be more accepting
of them
moving through our physical environments
if they represented our form a bit more.
Um, I also I was thinking of a bloody
baby gate. You know those like
kindergarten gates they get on stairs?
>> Yeah.
>> My dog can't open that. But a humanoid
robot could reach over the other side.
>> Yeah. And so could a centaur robot,
right? So in some sense, centaur robot
is
>> there's something ghastly about the look
of those though.
>> Is a humanoid. Well,
>> do you know what I mean? Like a
four-legged big monster sort of crawling
through my house when I have guests
over.
>> Your dog is a your dog is a four-legged
monster.
>> I know. Uh so I think actually I I would
argue the opposite that um
we want a distinct form because they are
distinct entities
and the more humanoid the worse it is in
terms of confusing our subconscious
psychological systems. So, I'm arguing
from the perspective of the people
making them. As in, if I was making the
decision whether it to be some
four-legged thing that I've that I'm
unfamiliar with that I'm less likely to
build a relationship with or allow to
take care of, I don't know, might might
look after my children. Obviously, I'm
listen, I'm not saying I would allow
this to look after my children,
>> but I'm saying from a if I'm building a
company,
>> the manufacturer would certainly
>> Yeah. want want to be
>> Yeah. So, I that's an interesting
question. I mean there's also what's
called the uncanny valley which is a a
phrase from computer graphics when they
started to make characters in computer
graphics they tried to make them look
more human right so if you if you for
example if you look at Toy Story
they're not very humanl looking right if
you look at the Incredibles they're not
very humanl looking and so we think of
them as cartoon characters if you try to
make them more human they naturally
become repulsive
>> until they don't
>> until they become very you have to be
very very close to perfect in order not
to be repulsive. So the the uncanny
valley is this I you know like the the
gap between you so perfectly human and
not at all human but in between it's
really awful and uh and so they there
were a couple of movies that tried like
Polar Express was one where they tried
to have quite humanlooking characters
you know being humans not not being
superheroes or anything else and it's
repulsive to watch. I when I watched
that shareholder presentation the other
day, Elon had these two humanoid robots
dancing on stage and I've seen lots of
humanoid robot demonstrations over the
years. You know, you've seen like the
Boston Dynamics dog thing jumping around
and whatever else.
>> But there was a moment where my brain
for the first time ever genuinely
thought there was a human in a suit.
Mhm.
>> And I actually had to research to check
if that was really their Optimus robot
because the way it was dancing was so
unbelievably fluid that for the first
time ever, my my my brain has only ever
associated those movements with human
movements. And I I'll play it on the
screen if anyone hasn't seen it, but
it's just the robots dancing on stage.
And I was like, that is a human in a
suit. And it was really the knees that
gave it away because the knees were all
metal. Huh. I thought there's no way
that could be a human knee in a in one
of those suits. And he, you know, he
says they're going into production next
year. They're used internally at Tesla
now, but he says they're going into
production next year. And it's going to
be pretty crazy when we walk outside and
see robots. I think that'll be the
paradigm shift. I've heard actually many
I've heard Elon say this that the
paradigm shifting moment from many of us
will be when we walk outside onto the
streets and see humanoid robots walking
around. That will be when we realize
>> Yeah. I think even more so. I mean, in
San Francisco, we see driverless cars
driving around and uh it t takes some
getting used to actually, you know, when
you're you're driving and there's a car
right next to you with no driver in, you
know, and it's signaling and it wants to
change lanes in front of you and you
have to let it in and all this kind of
stuff. It's it's a little creepy, but I
think you're right. I think seeing the
humanoid robots, but that phenomenon
that you described where it was
sufficiently close that your brain
flipped into saying this is a human
being.
>> Mhm. [clears throat]
>> Right. That's exactly what I think we
should avoid.
>> Cuz I have the empathy for it then.
>> Because it's it's a lie and it brings
with it a whole lot of expectations
about how it's going to behave, what
moral rights it has, how you should
behave towards it. uh which are
completely wrong.
>> It levels the playing field between me
and it to some degree.
>> How hard is it going to be to just uh
you know switch it off and throw it in
the trash when when it breaks? I think
it's essential for us to keep machines
in the you know in the cognitive space
where they are machines and not bring
them into the cognitive space where
they're people because we will make
enormous mistakes by doing that. And I
see this every day even even just with
the chat bots. So the chat bots in
theory are supposed to say I don't have
any feelings. I'm just a algorithm.
But in fact they fail to do that all the
time. They are telling people that they
are conscious. They are telling people
that they have feelings. Uh they are
telling people that they are in love
with the user that they're talking to.
And people flip because first of all
it's you know very fluent language but
also a system that is identifying itself
as an eye as a sentient being. They
bring that object into the cognitive
space where that we normally reserve for
for other humans and they become
emotionally attached. They become
psychologically dependent. They even
allow these systems to tell them what to
do. What advice would you give a young
person at the start of their career then
about what they should be aiming at
professionally? Because I've actually
had an increasing number of young people
say to me that they have huge
uncertainty about whether the thing
they're studying now will matter at all.
A lawyer, uh, an accountant, and I don't
know what to say to these people. I
don't know what to say cuz I I believe
that the rate of improvement in AI is
going to continue. And therefore,
imagining any rate of improvement, it
gets to the point where I'm not being
funny, but all these white collar jobs
will be done by an a an AI or
[clears throat] an AI agent. Yeah. So,
there was a television series called
Humans. In humans, we have extremely
capable humanoid robots doing
everything. And at one point, the
parents are talking to their teenage
daughter who's very, very smart. And the
parents are saying, "Oh, you know, maybe
you should go into medicine." And the
daughter says, you know, why would I
bother? It'll take me seven years to
qualify. It takes a robot 7 seconds to
learn.
So nothing I do matters.
>> And is that how you feel about
>> So I think that's that's a future that
uh in fact that is the future that we
are
moving towards. I don't think it's a
future that everyone wants. That is what
is being uh created for us right now.
So in that future assuming that you know
even if we get halfway right in the
sense that okay perhaps not surgeons
perhaps not you know great violinists
there'll be pockets where perhaps humans
will remain good at it
>> where
>> the kinds of jobs where you hire people
by the hundred
will go away. Okay,
>> where people are in some sense
exchangeable that you you you just need
lots of them and uh you know when half
of them quit you just fill up those
those slots with more people in some
sense those are jobs where we're using
people as robots and that's a sort of
that's a sort of strange conundrum here
right that you know I imagine writing
science fiction 10,000 years ago right
when we're all hunter gatherers and I'm
this little science fiction author and
I'm describing this future where you
know there are going to be these giant
windowless boxes And you're going to go
in, you know, you you'll travel for
miles and you'll go into this windowless
box and you'll do the same thing 10,000
times for the whole day. And then you'll
leave and travel for miles to go home.
>> You're talking about this podcast.
>> And then you're going to go back and do
it again. And you would do that every
day of your life until you die.
>> The office
>> and people would say, "Ah, you're nuts."
Right? There's no way that we humans are
ever going to have a future like that
cuz that's awful. Right? But that's
exactly the future that we ended up with
with with office buildings and factories
where many of us go and do the same
thing thousands of times a day and we do
it thousands of days in a row uh and
then we die and we need to figure out
what is the next phase going to be like
and in particular how in that world
do we have the incentives
to become fully human which I think
means at least a level of education
that people have now and probably more
because I think to live a really rich
life
you need a better understanding of
yourself of the world
uh than most people get in their current
educations.
>> What is it to be human? to it's to
reproduce
to pursue stuff to go in the pursuit of
difficult things you know we used to
hunt on the
>> to [clears throat] attain goals right
it's always if I wanted to climb Everest
the last thing I would want is someone
to pick me up on helicopter and stick me
on the top
>> so we'll we'll voluntarily pursue hard
things so although I could get the robot
to build me a ranch in on this plot of
land I choose to do it because the
pursuit itself is rewarding.
>> Yes,
>> we're kind of seeing that anyway, aren't
we? Don't you think we're seeing a bit
of that in society where life got so
comfortable that now people are like
obsessed with running marathons and
doing these crazy endurance
>> and and learning to cook complicated
things when they could just, you know,
have them delivered. Um, yeah. No, I
think there's there's real value in the
ability to do things and the doing of
those things. And I think you know the
obvious danger is the walle world where
everyone just consumes entertainment
uh which doesn't require much education
and doesn't lead to a rich satisfying
life. I think in the long run
>> a lot of people will choose that world.
I think some of yeah some people may
there's also I mean you know whether
you're consuming entertainment or
whether you're
doing something you know cooking or
painting or whatever because it's fun
and interesting to do what's missing
from that right all of that is purely
selfish
I think one of the reasons we work is
because we feel valued we feel like
we're benefiting other people
and I think some remember having this
conversation with um a lady in England
who helps to run the hospice movement.
And the people who work in the hospices
where you know the the patients are
literally there to die are largely
volunteers. So they're not doing it to
get paid
but they find it incredibly
rewarding to be able to spend time with
people who are in their last weeks or
months to give them company and
happiness.
So I actually think that interpersonal
roles
will be much much more important in
future. So if I was going to advise my
kids, not that they would ever listen,
but if I if my kids would listen and I
and and wanted to know what I thought
would be, you know, valued careers and
future, I think it would be these
interpersonal roles based on an
understanding of human needs,
psychology, there are some of those
roles right now. So obviously you know
therapists and psychiatrists and so on
but that that's a very much in sort of
asymmetric
role right where one person is suffering
and the other person is trying to
alleviate the suffering you know and
then there are things like they call
them executive coaches or life coaches
right that's a less asymmetric role
where someone is trying to uh help
another person live a better life
whether it's a better life in their work
role or or just uh how they live their
life in general. And so I could imagine
that those kinds of roles will expand
dramatically.
>> There's this interesting paradox that
exists when life becomes easier. Um
which shows that abundance consistently
pushes society societies towards more
individualism because once survival
pressures disappear, people prioritize
things differently. They prioritize
freedom, comfort, self-exression over
things like sacrifice or um family
formation. And we're seeing, I think, in
the west already, a decline in people
having kids because there's more
material abundance,
>> fewer kids, people are getting married
and committing to each other and having
relationships later and more
infrequently because generally once we
have more abundance, we don't want to
complicate our lives. Um, and at the
same time, as you said earlier, that
abundance breeds a an inability to find
meaning, a sort of shallowess to
everything. This is one of the things I
think a lot about, and I'm I'm in the
process now of writing a book about it,
which is this idea that individualism
was act is a bit of a lie. Like when I
say individualism and freedom, I mean
like the narrative at the moment amongst
my generation is you like be your own
boss and stand on your own two feet and
we're having less kids and we're not
getting married and it's all about me
me.
>> Yeah. That last part is where it goes
wrong.
>> Yeah. And it's like almost a
narcissistic society where
>> Yeah.
>> me me. My self-interest first. And when
you look at mental health outcomes and
loneliness and all these kinds of
things, it's going in a horrific
direction. But at the same time, we're
freer than ever. It seems like that you
know it seems like there's a we should
there's a maybe another story about
dependency which is not sexy like depend
on each other.
>> Oh I I I agree. I mean I think you know
happiness is not available from
consumption or even lifestyle right I
think happiness
arises from giving. [snorts]
It can be you through the work that you
do, you can see that other people
benefit from that or it could be in
direct interpersonal relationships.
>> There is an invisible tax on salespeople
that no one really talks about enough.
The mental load of remembering
everything like meeting notes,
timelines, and everything in between
until we started using our sponsors
product called Pipe Drive, one of the
best CRM tools for small and
medium-sized business owners. The idea
here was that it might alleviate some of
the unnecessary cognitive overload that
my team was carrying so that they could
spend less time in the weeds of admin
and more time with clients, in-person
meetings, and building relationships.
Pipe Drive has enabled this to happen.
It's such a simple but effective CRM
that automates the tedious, repetitive,
and timeconuming parts of the sales
process. And now our team can nurture
those leads and still have bandwidth to
focus on the higher priority tasks that
actually get the deal over the line.
Over a 100,000 companies across 170
countries already use Pipe Drive to grow
their business. And I've been using it
for almost a decade now. Try it free for
30 days. No credit card needed, no
payment needed. Just use my link
pipedive.com/ceo
to get started today. That's
pipedive.com/ceo.
Where does the rewards of this AI race
where does it acrue to?
I think a lot about this in terms of
like univers universal basic income. If
you have these five, six, seven, 10
massive AI companies that are going to
win the 15 quadrillion dollar prize.
>> Mhm.
>> And they're going to automate all of the
professional pursuits that we we
currently have. All of our jobs are
going to go away.
Who who gets all the money? And how do
how do we get some of it back?
[laughter]
>> Money actually doesn't matter, right?
what what matters is the production of
goods and services uh and then how those
are distributed and so so money acts as
a way to facilitate the distribution and
um exchange of those goods and services.
If all production is concentrated
um in the hands of a of a few companies,
right, that
sure they will lease some of their
robots to us. You know, we we want a
school in our village.
They lease the robots to us. The robots
build the school. They go away. We have
to pay a certain amount of of money for
that. But where do we get the money?
Right? If we are not producing anything
then uh we don't have any money unless
there's some redistribution mechanism.
And as you mentioned, so universal basic
income is
it seems to me an admission of failure
because what it says is okay, we're just
going to give everyone the money and
then they can use the money to pay the
AI company to lease the robots to build
the school and then we'll have a school
and that's good. Um
but what it's an admission of failure
because it says we can't work out a
system in which people have any worth or
any economic role.
Right? So 99% of the global population
is
from an economic point of view useless.
Can I ask you a question? If you had a
button in front of you and pressing that
button would stop all progress in
artificial intelligence right now and
forever, would you press it?
>> That's a very interesting question. Um,
if it's either or
either I do it now or it's too late and
we
careen into some uncontrollable future
perhaps. Yeah, cuz I I'm not super
optimistic that we're heading in the
right direction at all.
>> So, I put that button in front of you
now. It stops all AI progress, shuts
down all the AI companies immediately
globally, and none of them can reopen.
You press it.
Well, here's here's what I think should
happen. So, obviously, you know, I've
been doing AI for 50 years. um and
the original motivations which is that
AI can be a power tool for humanity
enabling us to do
more and better things than we can
unaded. I think that's still valid. The
problem is
the kinds of AI systems that we're
building are not tools. They are
replacements. In fact, you can see this
very clearly because we create them
literally as the closest replicas we can
make of human beings.
The technique for creating them is
called imitation learning. So we observe
human verbal behavior, writing or
speaking and we make a system that
imitates that as well as possible.
So what we are making is imitation
humans at least in the verbal sphere.
And so of course they're going to
replace us.
They're not tools.
>> So you had pressed the button.
>> So I say I think there is another course
which is use and develop AI as tools.
Tools for science
tools for economic organization and so
on.
um but not as replacements for human
beings.
>> What I like about this question is it
forces you to go into the pro into
probabilities.
>> Yeah. So, and that's that's why I'm
reluctant because I don't I don't agree
with the, you know, what's your
probability of doom,
>> right? Your so-called P of doom uh
number because that makes sense if
you're an alien.
You know, you're in you're in a bar with
some other aliens and you're looking
down at the Earth and you're taking bets
on, you know, are these humans going to
make a mess of things and go extinct
because they develop AI.
So, it's fine for those aliens to bet on
on that, but if you're a human, then
you're not just betting, you're actually
acting.
>> There there's an element to this though,
which I guess where probabilities do
come back in, which is you also have to
weigh when I give you such a binary
decision.
um the probability of us pursuing the
more nuanced safe approach into that
equation. So you're you're the the maths
in my head is okay, you've got all the
upsides here and then you've got
potential downsides and then there's a
probability of do I think we're actually
going to course correct based on
everything I know based on the incentive
structure of human beings and and
countries and then if there's but then
you could go if there's even a 1%
chance of extinction
is it even worth all these upsides?
>> Yeah. And I I would argue no. I mean
maybe maybe what we would say if if we
said okay it's going to stop the
progress for 50 years
>> you press it
>> and during those 50 years we can work on
how do we do AI in a way that's
guaranteed to be safe and beneficial how
do we organize
our societies to flourish uh in
conjunction with extremely capable AI
systems. So, we haven't answered either
of those questions.
And I don't think we want anything
resembling AGI until we have completely
solid answers to both of those
questions. So, if there was a button
where I could say, "All right, we're
going to pause progress for 50 years."
Yes, I would do it.
>> But if that button was in front of you,
you're going to make a decision either
way. Either you don't press it or you
press it.
>> I If Yeah. So, if that if that button is
there, stop it for 50 years. I would say
yes.
stop it forever?
Not yet. I think I think there's still a
decent chance that we can pull out of
this uh nose dive, so to speak, that
we're we're currently in. Ask me again
in a year, I might I might say, "Okay,
we do need to press the button."
>> What if What if in a scenario where you
never get to reverse that decision? You
never get to make that decision again.
So if in that scenario that I've laid
out this hypothetical, you either press
it now or it never gets pressed.
So there is no opportunity a year from
now.
>> Yeah, as you can tell, I'm [laughter]
sort of on on the fence a bit about
about this one. Um
yeah, I think I'd probably press it.
Yeah.
>> What's your reasoning?
uh just thinking about the power
dynamics
of um
what's happening now how difficult would
it would be to get the US in particular
to to regulate in favor of safety.
So I think you know what's clear from
talking to the companies is they are not
going to develop anything resembling
safe AGI unless they're forced to by the
government.
And at the moment the US government in
particular which regulates most of the
leading companies in AI is not only
refusing to regulate but even trying to
prevent the states from regulating. And
they're doing that at the behest of
uh a faction within Silicon Valley uh
called the accelerationists
who believe that the faster we get to
AGI the better. And when I say behest I
mean also they paid them a large amount
of money. Jensen Hang the the CEO of
Nvidia said who is for anyone that
doesn't know the guy making all the
chips that are powering AI said China is
going to win the AI race arguing it is
just a nanocond behind the United
States. China have produced 24,000 AI
papers compared to just 6,000
from the US
more than the combined output of the US
the UK and the EU.
China is anticipated to quickly roll out
their new technologies both domestically
and developing new technologies for
other developing countries.
So the accelerators or the accelerate I
think you call them the accelerants
>> accelerationists.
>> The accelerationists
>> I mean they would say well if we don't
then China will. So we have to we have
to go fast. It's another version of the
the race that the companies are in with
each other, right? That we, you know, we
know that this race is
heading off a cliff,
but we can't stop. So, we're all just
going to go off this cliff. And
obviously, that's nuts,
right? I mean, we're all looking at each
other saying, "Yeah, there's a cliff
over there." Running as fast as we can
towards this cliff. We're looking at
each other saying, "Why aren't we
stopping?"
So the narrative in Washington, which I
think Jensen Hang is
either reflecting or or perhaps um
promoting
uh is that you know, China has is
completely unregulated
and uh you know, America will only slow
itself down uh if it regulates a AI in
any way. So this is a completely false
narrative because China's AI regulations
are actually quite strict even compared
to um the European Union
and China's government has explicitly
acknowledged uh the need and their
regulations are very clear. You can't
build AI systems that could escape human
control. And not only that, I don't
think they view the race in the same way
as, okay, we we just need to be the
first to create AGI. I think they're
more interested in figuring out how to
disseminate AI as a set of tools within
their economy to make their economy more
productive and and so on. So that's
that's their version of the race.
>> But of course, they still want to build
the weapons for adversaries, right? to
so that they can take down I don't know
Taiwan if they want to.
>> So weapons are a separate matter and I
happy to talk about weapons but just in
terms of
>> control
>> uh control economic domination
um they they don't view putting all your
eggs in the AGI basket as the right
strategy. So they want to use AI, you
know, even in its present form to make
their economy much more efficient and
productive and also, you know, to give
people new capabilities and and better
quality of life and and I think the US
could do that as well. And
um typically western countries don't
have as much of uh central government
control over what companies do and some
companies are investing in AI to make
their operations more efficient uh and
some are not and we'll see how that
plays out.
>> What do you think of Trump's approach to
AI? So Trump's approach is, you know,
it's it's echoing what Jensen Wang is
saying that the US has to be the one to
create AGI and very explicitly the
administration's policy is to uh
dominate the world.
That's the word they use, dominate. I'm
not sure that other countries like the
idea that um they will be dominated by
American AI. But is that an accurate
description of what will happen if the
US build AGI technology before say the
UK where I'm originally from and where
you're originally from? What does the
This is something I think about a lot
because we're going through this budget
process in the UK at the moment where
we're figuring out how we going to spend
our money and how we're going to tax
people and also we've got this new
election cycle. It's approaching quickly
where people are talking about
immigration issues and this issue and
that issue and the other issue. What I
don't hear anyone talking about is AI
and the humanoid robots that are
going to take everything. We're very
concerned with the brown people crossing
the channel, but the humanoid robots
that are going to be super intelligent
and really take causing economic disrupt
disruption. No one talks about that. The
political leaders don't talk about it.
It doesn't win races. I don't see it on
billboards.
>> Yeah. And it's it it's interesting
because
in fact I mean so there's there's two
forces that have been hollowing out the
middle classes in western countries. One
of them is globalization where lots and
lots of work not just manufacturing but
white collar work gets outsourced to
low-income countries. Uh but the other
is automation
and you know some of that is factories.
So um the amount of employment in
manufacturing continues to drop even as
the amount of output from manufacturing
in the US and in the UK continues to
increase. So we talk about oh you know
our manufacturing industry has been
destroyed. It hasn't. It's producing
more than ever just with you know a
quarter as many people. So it's
manufacturing employment that's been
destroyed by automation and robotics and
so on. And then you know computerization
has eliminated whole layers of white
collar jobs. And so those two those two
forms of automation have probably done
more to hollow out middle class uh
employment and standard of life.
>> If the UK doesn't participate
in this new e technological wave
that seems to be that seems to you know
it's going to take a lot of jobs. cars
are going to drive themselves. Whimo
just announced that they're coming to
London, which is the driverless cars,
and driving is the biggest occupation in
the world, for example. So, you've got
immediate disruption there. And where
does the money acrew to? Well, it acrus
to who owns Whimo, which is what? Google
and Silicon Valley companies.
>> Alphabet owns Whimo 100%. I think so.
Yes. I mean this is so I was in India a
few months ago talking to the government
ministers because they're holding the
next global AI summit in February and
and their view going in was you know AI
is great we're going to use it to you
know turbocharge the growth of our
Indian economy
when for example you have AGI you have
AGI controlled robots
that can do all the manufacturing that
can do agriculture that can do all the
white work and goods and services that
might have been produced by Indians will
instead be produced by
American controlled
AGI systems at much lower prices. You
know, a consumer given a choice between
an expensive product produced by Indians
or a cheap product produced by American
robots will probably choose
the cheap product produced by American
robots. And so potentially every country
in the world with the possible exception
of North Korea will become a kind of a
client state
of American AI companies.
>> A client state of American AI companies
is exactly what I'm concerned about for
the UK economy. Really any economy
outside of the United States. I guess
one could also say China, but because
those are the two nations that are
taking AI most seriously.
>> Mhm. [clears throat]
>> And I I I don't know what our economy
becomes. cuz I can't figure out
can't figure out what our what the
British economy becomes in such a world.
Is it tourism? I don't know. Like you
come here to to to look at the
Buckingham Palace. I
>> you you can think about countries but I
mean even for the United States it's the
same problem.
>> At least they'll be able to hell out you
know. So some small fraction of the
population will be running maybe the AI
companies but increasingly
even those companies will be replacing
their human employees with AI systems.
>> So [clears throat] Amazon for example
which you know sells a lot of computing
services to AI companies is using AI to
replace layers of management is planning
to use robots to replace all of its
warehouse workers and so on. So, so even
the the giant AI companies
will have few human employees in the
long run. I mean, it think of the
situation, you know, pity the poor CEO
whose board
says, "Well, you know, unless you turn
over your decision-making power to the
AI system, um, we're going to have to
fire you because all our competitors are
using, you know, an AI powered CEO and
they're doing much better." Amazon plans
to replace 600,000 workers with robots
in a memo that just leaked, which has
been widely talked about. And the CEO,
Andy Jasse, told employees that the
company expects its corporate workforce
to shrink in the coming years because of
AI and AI agents. And they've publicly
gone live with saying that they're going
to cut 14,000 corporate jobs in the near
term as part of its refocus on AI
investment and efficiency.
It's interesting because I was reading
about um the sort of different quotes
from different AI leaders about the
speed in which this this stuff is going
to happen [snorts] and what you see in
the quotes is Demis who's the CEO of
DeepMind
>> saying things like it'll be more than 10
times bigger than the industrial
revolution but also it'll happen maybe
10 times faster and they speak about
this turbulence that we're going to
experience as this shift takes place.
That's um maybe a euphemism
for [laughter]
uh and I think that you know governments
are now
you know they they've kind of gone from
saying oh don't worry you know we'll
just retrain everyone as data scientists
like well yeah that's that's ridiculous
right the world doesn't need four
billion data scientists
>> and we're not all capable of becoming
that by the way
>> uh yeah or have any interest in in doing
that
>> I I could even if I wanted to like I
tried to sit in biology class and I fell
asleep so [laughter] I couldn't that was
the end of my career as a surgeon. Fair
enough. Um, [clears throat]
but yeah, now suddenly they're staring,
you know, 80% unemployment in the face
and wondering how how on earth is our
society going to hold together.
>> We'll deal with it when we get there.
>> Yeah. Unfortunately, um,
unless we plan ahead,
we're going to suffer the consequences,
right? can't. It was bad enough in the
industrial revolution which unfolded
over seven or eight decades but there
was massive disruption
and uh misery
caused by that. We don't have a model
for a functioning society where almost
everyone does nothing
at least nothing of economic value.
Now, it's not impossible that there
could be such a a functioning society,
but we don't know what it looks like.
And you know, when you think about our
education system, which would probably
have to look very different and how long
it takes to change that. I mean, I'm
always
reminding people about uh how long it
took Oxford to decide that geography was
a proper subject of study. It took them
125 years from the first proposal that
there should be a geography degree until
it was finally approved. So we don't
have very long
to completely revamp a system that we
know takes decades and decades
to reform and we don't know how to
reform it because we don't know what we
want the world to look like. Is this one
of your reasons why you're appalled at
the moment? Because when you have these
conversations with people, people just
don't have answers, yet they're plowing
ahead at rapid speed.
>> I would say it's not necessarily the job
of the AI companies. So, I'm appalled by
the AI companies because they don't have
an answer for how they're going to
control the systems that they're
proposing to build. I do find it
disappointing that uh governments don't
seem to be grappling with this issue. I
think there are a few I think for
example Singapore government seems to be
quite farsighted and they've they've
thought this through you know it's a
small country they've figured out okay
this this will be our role uh going
forward and we think we can find you
know some some purpose for our people in
this in this new world but for I think
countries with large populations
um [clears throat]
they need to figure out answers to these
questions pretty fast it takes a long
time to implement those answers uh in
the form of new kinds of education, new
professions, new qualifications,
uh new economic structures.
I mean, it's it's it's possible. I mean,
when you look at therapists, for
example, they're almost all
self-employed.
So, what happens when, you know, 80% of
the population transitions from regular
employment into into self-employment?
what does that what does that do to the
economics of of uh government finances
and so on. So there's just lots of
questions and how do you you know if
that's the future you know why are we
training people to to fit into 9 to5
office jobs which won't exist at all
>> last month I told you about a challenge
that I'd set our internal flightex team
flight team is our innovation team
internally here I tasked them with
seeing how much time they could unlock
for the company by creating something
that would help us filter new AI tools
to see which ones were worth pursuing
and I thought that our sponsor Fiverr
Pro might have the talent on their
platform to help us build this quickly.
So I talked to my director of innovation
Isaac and for the last month my team
Flight X and a vetted [clears throat] AI
specialist from Fiverr Pro have been
working together on this project and
with the help of my team we've been able
to create a brand new tool which
automatically scans scores and
prioritizes different emerging AI tools
for us. Its impact has been huge and
within a couple of weeks this tool has
already been saving us hours triing and
testing new AI systems. Instead of
shifting through lots of noise, my team
flight X has been able to focus on
developing even more AI tools, ones that
really move the needle in our business
thanks to the talent on Fiverr Pro. So,
if you've got a complex problem and you
need help solving it, make sure you
check out Fiverr Pro at
fiverr.com/diary.
So, many of us are pursuing passive
forms of income and to build side
businesses in order to help us cover our
bills. And that opportunity is here with
our sponsor Stan, a business that I
co-own. It is the platform that can help
you take full advantage of your own
financial situation. Stan enables you to
work for yourself. It makes selling
digital products, courses, memberships,
and more simple products more scalable
and easier to do. You can turn your
ideas into income and get the support to
grow whatever you're building. And we're
about to launch Dare to Dream. It's for
those who are ready to make the shift
from thinking to building, from planning
to actually doing the thing. It's about
seeing that dream in your head and
knowing exactly what it takes to bring
it to life. If you're ready to transform
your life, visit daretodream.stan.store.
You've made many attempts to raise
awareness and to call for a heightened
consciousness about the future of AI.
Um, in October, over 850 experts,
including yourself and other leaders,
like Richard Branson, who I've had on
the show, and Jeffrey Hinton, who I've
had on the show, signed a statement to
ban AI super intelligence, as you guys
raised concerns of potential human
extinction.
>> Sort of. Yeah. It says, at least until
we are sure that we can move forward
safely and there's broad scientific
consensus on that. So, that
>> did it work? [gasps]
>> It's hard. It's hard to say. I mean
interestingly there was a related so
what was called the the pause statement
was March of 23. So that was when GPT4
came out the successor to chat GPT. So
we we suggested that there'd be a
six-month pause in developing and
deploying systems more powerful than
GPD4. And everyone poo pooed that idea.
Of course no one's going to pause
anything. But in fact, there were no
systems in the next 6 months deployed
that were more powerful than GPT4.
Um, none coincidence. You be the judge.
I would say
that what we're trying to do is to is to
basically shift
the
the public debate.
You know there's this bizarre phenomenon
that keeps happening in the media
where if you talk about these risks
they will say oh you know there's a
fringe of people you know called quote
doomers who think that there's you know
risk of extinction. Um so they always
the narrative is always that oh you know
talking about those risk is a fringe
thing. Pretty much all the CEOs of the
leading AI companies
think that there's a significant risk of
extinction. Almost all the leading AI
researchers think there's a sign
significant risk of human extinction.
Um so
why is that the fringe, right? Why isn't
that the mainstream? If the these are
the leading experts in industry and
academia
uh saying this, how could it be the
fringe? So we're trying to change that
narrative
to say no, the people who really
understand this stuff are extremely
concerned.
>> And what do you want to happen? What is
the solution?
>> What I think is that we should have
effective regulation.
It's hard to argue with that, right? Uh
so what does effective mean? It means
that if you comply with the regulation,
then the risks are reduced to an
acceptable level.
So for example,
we ask people who want to operate
nuclear plants, right? We've decided
that the risk we're willing to live with
is, you know, a one in a million chance
per year that the plant is going to have
a meltdown. Any higher than that, you
know, we just don't it's not worth it.
Right. So you have to be below that.
Some cases we can get down to one in 10
million chance per year. So what chance
do you think we should be willing to
live with for human extinction?
>> Me?
>> Yeah.
[clears throat]
>> 0.00001.
>> Yeah. Lots of zeros.
>> Yeah.
>> Right. So one in a million for a nuclear
meltdown.
>> Extinction is much worse.
>> Oh yeah. So yeah, it's kind of right. So
>> one in 100 billion, one in a trillion.
>> Yeah. So if you said one in a billion,
right, then you'd expect one extinction
per billion years. There's a background.
So one one of the ways people work out
these risk levels is also to look at the
background. The other ways of getting
going extinct would include, you know,
giant asteroid crashes into the earth.
And you can roughly calculate what those
probabilities are. We can look at how
many extinction level events have
happened in the past and, you know,
maybe it's half a dozen over. So, so
there's maybe it's like a one in 500
million year event. So, somewhere in
that range, right? Somewhere between 1
in 10 million, which is the best nuclear
power plants, and and one in 500 million
or one in a billion, which is the
background
risk from from giant asteroids. Uh so,
let's say we settle on 100 million, one
in a 100 million chance per year. Well,
what is it according to the CEOs? 25%.
So they're off by a factor of multiple
millions,
right? So they need to make the AI
systems millions of times safer.
>> Your analogy of the roulette, Russian
roulette comes back in here because
that's like for anyone that doesn't know
what probabilities are in this context,
that's like having a ammunition chamber
with four holes in it and putting a
bullet in one of them.
>> One in four. [clears throat] Yeah. And
we're saying we want it to be one in a
billion. So we want a billion chambers
and a bullet in one of them.
>> Yeah. And and so when you look at the
work that the nuclear operators have to
do to show that their system is that
reliable,
uh it's a massive mathematical analysis
of the components, you know, redundancy.
You've got monitors, you've got warning
lights, you've got operating procedures.
You have all kinds of mechanisms which
over the decades have ratcheted that
risk down. It started out I think one in
one in 10,000 years, right? And they've
improved it by a factor of 100 or a
thousand by all of these mechanisms. But
at every stage they had to do a
mathematical analysis to show what the
risk was.
The people developing the AI company,
the AI systems, sorry, the AI companies
developing these systems, they don't
even understand how the AI systems work.
So their 25% chance of extinction is
just a seat of the pants guess. They
actually have no idea.
But the tests that they are doing on
their systems right now, you know, they
show that the AI systems will be willing
to kill people
uh to preserve their own existence
already, right? They will lie to people.
They will blackmail them. They will they
will launch nuclear weapons rather than
uh be switched off. And so there's no
there's no positive sign that we're
getting any closer to safety with these
systems. In fact, the signs seem to be
that we're going uh deeper and deeper
into uh into dangerous behaviors. So
rather than say ban, I would just say
prove to us that the risk is less than
one in a 100 million per year of
extinction or loss of control, let's
say. And uh so we're not banning
anything.
The company's response is, "Well, we
don't know how to do that, so you can't
have a rule."
Literally, they are saying, "Humanity
has no right to protect itself from us."
>> If I was an alien looking down on planet
Earth right now, I would find this
fascinating
that these
>> Yeah. You're in the bar betting on
who's, [laughter] you know, are they
going to make it or not.
>> Just a really interesting experiment in
like human incentives. the analogy you
gave of there being this quadr
quadrillion dollar magnet pulling us off
the edge of the cliff
and yet we're still being drawn towards
it through greed and this promise of
abundance and power and status and I'm
going to be the one that summoned the
god
>> I mean it says something about us as
humans
says something about our our darker
sides
>> yes and the aliens will write an amazing
tragic play cycle
about what happened to the human race.
>> Maybe the AI is the alien
[clears throat] and it's going to talk
about, you know, we have our our stories
about God making the world in seven days
and Adam and Eve. Maybe it'll have its
own religious stories about
the God that made it us and how it
sacrificed itself. Just like Jesus
sacrificed himself for us, we sacrificed
ourselves for it.
>> Yeah. which is the wrong way around,
right? [laughter]
>> But that is that is the story of that's
that's the Judeo-Christian story, isn't
it? That God, you know, Jesus gave his
life for us so that we could be here
full of sin.
>> But is yeah, God is still watching over
us and uh probably wondering when we're
going to get our act together.
>> What is the most important thing we
haven't talked about that we should have
talked about, Professor Stuart Russell?
So I think um [clears throat]
the question of whether it's possible to
make
uh super intelligent AI systems that we
can control
>> is it possible?
>> I I think yes. I think it's possible and
I think we need to actually just have a
different conception of what it is we're
trying to build. For a long time with
with AI, we've just had this notion of
pure intelligence, right? The the
ability to bring about whatever future
you, the intelligent entity, want to
bring about.
>> The more intelligence, the better.
>> The more intelligent the better and the
more capability it will have to create
the future that it wants. And actually
we don't want pure intelligence
because
what the future that it wants might not
be the future that we want. There's
nothing particle
humans out as the the only thing that
matters,
right? You know, pure intelligence might
decide that actually it's going to make
life wonderful for cockroaches or or
actually doesn't care about biological
life at all.
We actually want intelligence whose only
purpose is to bring about the future
that we want. Right? So it's we want it
to be first of all keyed to humans
specifically not to cockroaches not to
aliens not to itself.
>> We want to make it loyal to humans.
>> Right? So keyed to humans
and the difficulty that I mentioned
earlier right the king Midas problem.
How do we specify
what we want the future to be like so
that it can do it for us? How do we
specify the objectives?
Actually, we have to give up on that
idea because it's not possible. Right?
We've seen this over and over again in
human history. Uh we don't know how to
specify the future properly. We don't
know how to say what we want. And uh you
know, I always use the example of the
genie, right? What's the third wish that
you give to the genie who's granted you
three wishes? Right? Undo the first two
wishes because I made a mess of the
universe.
>> So, um, so in fact, what we're going to
do is
we're going to make it the machine's job
to figure out. So, it has to bring about
the future that we want,
but
it has to figure out what that is. And
it's going to start out not knowing.
And uh
over time through interacting with us
and observing the choices we make, it
will learn more about what we want the
future to be like.
But probably it will forever have
residual uncertainty
about what we really want the future to
be like. It'll it'll be fairly sure
about some things and it can help us
with those.
and it'll be uncertain about other
things and it'll be uh in those cases it
will not take action that might upset
humans with that you know with that
aspect of the world. So to give you a
simple example right um what color do we
want the sky to be?
It's not sure. So it shouldn't mess with
the sky
unless it knows for sure that we really
want purple with green stripes.
Everything you're saying sounds like
we're creating
a god. Like earlier on I was saying that
we are the god but actually everything
you described there almost sounds like
every every god in religion where you
know we pray to gods but they don't
always do anything about it.
>> Not not exactly. No it's it's in some
sense I'm thinking more like the ideal
butler. To the extent that the butler
can anticipate your wishes they should
help you bring them about. But in in
areas where there's uncertainty, it can
ask questions. We can we can make
requests.
>> This sounds like God to me because, you
know, I might say to God or this butler,
uh, could you go get me my uh my car
keys from upstairs? And its assessment
would be, listen, if I do this for this
person, then their muscles are going to
atrophy. Then they're going to lose
meaning in their life. Then they're not
going to know how to do hard things. So
I won't get involved. It's an
intelligence that sits in. But actually,
probably in most situations, it
optimizing for comfort for me or doing
things for me is actually probably not
in my best long-term interests. It's
probably it's probably useful that I
have a girlfriend and argue with her and
that I like raise kids and that I walk
to the shop and get my own stuff.
>> I agree with you. I mean, I think that's
So, you're putting your finger on
uh in some sense sort of version 2.0,
right? So, let's get version 1.0 clear,
right? this this form of AI where
it has to further our interest but it
doesn't know what those interests are
right it then puts an obligation on it
to learn more and uh to be helpful where
it understands well enough and to be
cautious where it doesn't understand
well so on so that that actually we can
formulate as a mathematical problem and
at least under idealized circumstances
we can literally solve that So we can
make AI systems that know how to solve
this problem and help the entities that
they are interacting with.
>> The reason I make the God analogy is
because I think that such a being, such
an intelligence would realize the
importance of equilibrium in the world.
Pain and pleasure, good and evil, and
then it would
>> absolutely
>> and then it would be like this.
>> So So right. So yes, I mean that's sort
of what happens in the matrix, right?
They tried the the AI systems in the
matrix, they tried to give us a utopia,
but it failed miserably and uh you know,
fields and fields of humans had to be
destroyed. Um, and the best they could
come up with was, you know, late 20th
century regular human life with all of
its problems, right? And I think this is
a really interesting point
and absolutely central because you know
there's a lot of science fiction where
super intelligent robots you know they
just want to help humans and the humans
who don't like that you know they just
give them a little brain operation to
then they do like it. Um and it takes
away human motivation.
uh it it by taking away failure uh
taking away disease you actually lose
important parts of human life and it
becomes in some sense pointless. So if
it turns out
that there simply isn't any way that
humans can really flourish
in coexistence with super intelligent
machines, even if they're perfectly
designed to to to solve this problem of
figuring out what humans what futures uh
humans want and and bringing about those
futures.
If that's not possible, then those
machines will actually disappear.
>> Why would they disappear?
>> Because that's the best thing for us.
Maybe they would stay available for real
existential emergencies, like if there
is a giant asteroid about to hit the
earth that maybe they'll help us uh
because they at least want the human
species to continue. But to some extent,
it's not a perfect analogy, but it's
it's sort of the way that human parents
have to at some point step back from
their kids' lives and say, "Okay, no,
you have to tie your own shoelaces
today."
>> This is kind of what I was thinking.
Maybe there was uh a civilization before
us and they arrived at this moment in
time where they created an intelligence
and that intelligence did all the things
you've said and it realized the
importance of equilibrium. So it decided
not to get involved and
maybe at some level
that's the god we look up to the stars
and worship one that's not really
getting involved and letting things play
out however however they are. but might
step in in the case of a real
existential emergency.
>> Maybe, maybe not. Maybe. [laughter] But
then and then maybe the cycle repeats
itself where you know the organisms it
let have free will end up creating the
same intelligence and then the universe
perpetuates infinitely.
>> Yep. There there are science fiction
stories like that too. [laughter] Yeah.
I hope there is some happy medium where
the AI systems can be there and we can
take advantage of of those capabilities
to have a civilization that's much
better than the one we have now.
Um, but I think you're right. A
civilization with no challenges
is not uh is not conducive to human
flourishing.
>> What can the average person do, Stuart?
average person listening to this now to
aid the cause that you're fighting for.
>> I actually think um you know this sounds
corny but you know talk to your
representative, your MP, your
congressperson, whatever it is. Um
because
I think the policy makers need to hear
from people. The only voices they're
hearing right now are the tech companies
and their $50 billion checks.
And um
all the polls that have been done say
yeah most people 80% maybe don't want
there to be super intelligent machines
but they don't know what to do. You know
even for me I've been in this field for
decades.
uh I'm not sure what to do because of
this giant magnet pulling everyone
forward and uh and the vast sums of
money being being put into this. Um, but
I am sure that if you want to have a
future
and a world that you want your kids to
live in, uh, you need to make your voice
heard
and, uh, and I think governments will
listen
from a political point of view, right?
You put your finger in the wind and you
say, "hm, should I be on the side of
humanity or our future robot overlords?"
I think I think as a politician, it's
not a difficult decision.
>> It is when you've got someone saying,
"I'll give you $50 billion."
>> Exactly. So, um I think I think people
in those positions of power need to hear
from their constituents
um that this is not the direction we
want to go.
>> After committing your career to this
subject and the subject of technology
more broadly, but specifically being the
guy that wrote the book about artificial
intelligence,
you must realize that you're living in a
historical moment. Like there's very few
times in my life where I go, "Oh, this
is one of those moments. This is a
crossroads in history." And it must to
some degree weigh upon you knowing that
you're a person of influence at this
historical moment in time who could
theoretically
help divert the course of history in
this moment in time. It's kind of like
the you look through history, you see
these moments of like Oenheimer and um
does it weigh on you when you're alone
at night thinking to yourself and
reading things?
>> Yeah, it does. I mean, you know, after
50 years, I could retire and um, you
know, play golf and sing and sail and do
things that I enjoy. Um,
but instead, I'm working 80 or 100 hours
a week
um trying to move
uh move things in the right direction.
>> What is that narrative in your head
that's making you do that? Like what is
the is there an element of I might
regret this if I don't or
>> just it's it's not only the the right
thing to do it's it's completely
essential. I mean there isn't
there isn't a bigger motivation
than this.
>> Do you feel like you're winning or
losing?
It feels um
like things are moving somewhat in the
right direction. You know, it's a a
ding-dong battle as uh as David Coleman
used to say in uh in the exciting
football match in 2023, right? So, uh
GPT4 came out and then we issued the
pause statement that was signed by a lot
of leading AI researchers. Um and then
in May there was the extinction
statement which included
uh Sam Holman and Deis Sabis and Dario
Amade other CEOs as well saying yeah
this is an extinction risk on the level
with nuclear war and I think governments
listened at that point the UK government
earlier that year had said oh well you
know we don't need to regulate AI you
know full speed ahead technology is good
for you and by June they had completely
changed and Rishi Sununnak announced
that he was going to hold this global AI
safety summit uh in England and he
wanted London to be the global hub for
AI regulation
um and so on. So and then you know when
beginning of November of 23 28 countries
including the US and China signed a
declaration
saying you know AI presents catastrophic
risks and it's urgent that we address
them and so on. So there it felt like,
wow, they're listening. They're going to
do something about it.
And then I think, you know, the am the
amount of money going into AI was
already ramping up
and the tech companies pushed back
and this narrative took hold that um the
US in particular has to win the race
against China.
The Trump administration completely
dismissed
uh any concerns about safety explicitly.
And interestingly, right, I mean they
did that as far as I can tell directly
in response to the accelerationists such
as Mark Andre going to Washington or
sorry going to Trump before the election
and saying if I give you X amount of
money will you announce that there will
be no regulation of AI and Trump said
yes you know probably like what is AI
doesn't matter as long as we give you
the money right okay uh Uh so they gave
him the money and he said there's going
to be no regulation of AI. Up to that
point it was a bipartisan
issue in Washington. Both parties were
concerned. Both parties were on the side
of the human race against the robot
overlords.
Uh and that moment turned it into a
partisan issue. The
after the election the US put pressure
on the French who are the next hosts of
the global AI summit.
uh and that was in February of this year
and uh and that summit turned in from
you know what had been focused largely
on safety in the UK to a summit that
looked more like a trade show. So it was
focused largely on money and so that was
sort of the Nadia right you know the
pendulum swung because of corporate
pressure uh and their ability to take
over the the political dimension.
Um, but I would say since then things
have been moving back again. So I'm
feeling a bit more optimistic than I did
in February. You know, we have a a
global movement now. There's an
international association for safe and
ethical AI
uh which has several thousand members
and um more than 120 organizations in
dozens of countries are affiliates of
this global organization.
Um, so I'm
I'm thinking that if we can in
particular if we can activate public
opinion
which which works through the media and
through popular culture uh then we have
a chance
>> seen such a huge appetite to learn about
these subjects from our audience.
We know when Jeffrey Hinton came on the
show I think about 20 million people
downloaded or streamed that conversation
which was staggering. and the the other
conversations we've had about AI safety
with othera safety experts have done
exactly the same it says something it
kind of reflects what you were saying
about the 80% of the population are
really concerned and don't want this but
that's not what you see in the sort of
commercial world and listen I um I have
to always acknowledge my own my own
apparent contradiction because I am both
an investor in companies that are
accelerating AI but at the same time
someone who spends a lot of time on my
podcast speaking to people that are
warning against the risk And actually
like there's many ways you can look at
this. I used to work in social media for
for six or seven years built one of the
big social media marketing companies in
Europe and people would often ask me is
like social media a good thing or a bad
thing and I'd talk about the bad parts
of it and then they'd say you know
you're building a social media company
you're not contributing to the problem.
Well I think I think that like binary
way of thinking is often the problem. It
the binary way of thinking that like
it's all bad or it's all really really
good is like often the problem and that
this push to put you into a camp.
Whereas I think the most uh
intellectually honest and high integrity
people I know can point at both the bad
and the good.
>> Yeah. I I think it's it's bizarre to be
accused of being anti- AI uh to be
called a lite. Um you know as I said
when I wrote the book on which from
which almost everyone learns about AI um
and uh you know is it if you called a
nuclear engineer who works on the safety
of nuclear power plants would you call
him anti-ysics
right it's it's bizarre right it's we're
not anti- AAI in fact
the need for safety in AI is a
complement to AI right if AI was useless
and stupid, we wouldn't be worried about
uh its safety. It's only because it's
becoming more capable that we have to be
concerned about safety.
Uh so I don't see this as anti-AI at
all. In fact, I would say without
safety, there will be no AI,
right? There is no future with human
beings where we have unsafe AI. So it's
either no AI or safe AI.
We have a closing tradition on this
podcast where the last guest leaves a
question for the next, not knowing who
they're leaving it for. And the question
left for you is, what do you value the
most in life and why? And lastly, how
many times has this answer changed?
>> Um,
I value my family most and that answer
hasn't changed for nearly 30 years.
What else outside of your family?
>> Truth.
And that Yeah, that answer hasn't
changed at all. I I've always
wanted the world to base its life on
truth.
And I find the propagation or deliberate
propagation of falsehood uh to be one of
the worst things that we can do. even if
that truth is inconvenient.
>> Yeah,
>> I think that's a really important point
which is that you know people people
often don't like hearing things that are
negative and so the visceral reaction is
often to just shoot or aim at the person
who is delivering the bad news because
if I discredit you or I shoot at you
then it makes it easier for me to
contend with the news that I don't like,
the thing that's making me feel
uncomfortable. And so I I applaud you
for what you're doing because you're
going to get lots of shots taken at you
because you're delivering an
inconvenient truth which generally
people won't won't always love. But also
you are messing with people's ability to
get that quadrillion dollar prize which
means there'll be more deliberate
attempts to discredit people like
yourself and Jeff Hinton and other
people that I've spoken to on the show.
But again, when I look back through
history, I think that progress has come
from the pursuit of truth even when it
was inconvenient. And actually much of
the luxuries that I value in my life are
the consequence of other people that
came before me that were brave enough or
bold enough to pursue truth at times
when it was inconvenient.
>> And so I very much respect and value
people like yourself for that very
reason. You've written this incredible
book called human compatible artificial
intelligence and the problem of control
which I think was published in 2020.
>> 2019. Yeah. There's a new edition from
2023.
>> Where do people go if they want more
information on your work and you do they
go to your website? Do they get this
book? what's the best place for them to
learn more?
>> So, so the book is written for the
general public. Um, I'm easy to find on
the web. The information on my web page
is mostly targeted for academics. So,
it's a lot of technical research papers
and so on. Um, there is an organization
as I mentioned called the International
Association for Safe and Ethical AI. Uh,
that has a a website. It has a terrible
acronym unfortunately, I AI. We
pronounce it ICI but it uh it's easy to
misspell but you can find that on the
web as well and that has uh that has
resources uh you can join the
association
uh you can apply to come to our annual
conference and you know I think
increasingly not you know not just AI
researchers like Jeff Hinton Yosha
Benjio but also I think uh you know
writers Brian Christian for example has
a nice book called the alignment problem
Um
and uh he's looking at it from the
outside. He's not
or at least when he wrote it, he wasn't
an AI researcher. He's now becoming one.
Um
but uh he he has talked to many of the
people involved in these questions uh
and tries to give an objective view. So
I think it's a it's a pretty good book.
>> I will link all of that below for anyone
that wants to check out any of those
links and learn more.
Professor Stuart Russell, thank you so
much. really appreciate you taking the
time and the effort to come and have
this conversation and I think uh I think
it's pushing the public conversation in
a in an important direction.
>> Thanks you
>> and I applaud you for doing that.
>> Really nice talking to you. [music]
>> I'm absolutely obsessed with 1%. If you
know me, if you follow Behind the Diary,
which is our behind the scenes channel,
if you've heard me speak on stage, if
you follow me on any social media
channel, you've probably heard me
talking about 1%. It is the defining
philosophy of my health, of my
companies, of my habit formation and
everything in between, which is this
obsessive focus on the small things.
Because sometimes in life, we aim at
really, really, really, really big
things, big steps forward. Mountains we
have to climb. And as NAL told me on
this podcast, when you aim at big
things, you get psychologically
demotivated. You end up procrastinating,
avoiding them, and change never happens.
So, with that in mind, with everything
I've learned about 1% and with
everything I've learned from
interviewing the incredible guests on
this podcast, we made the 1% diary just
over a year ago and it sold out. And it
is the best feedback we've ever had on a
diary that we have created because what
it does is it takes you through this
incredible process over 90 days to help
you build and form brand new habits. So,
if you want to get one for yourself or
you want to get one for your team, your
company, a friend, a sibling, anybody
that listens to the diary of a co, head
over immediately to the diary.com
and you can inquire there about getting
a bundle if you want to get one for your
team or for a large group of people.
That is the diary.com.
[music]
Heat. Heat.
[singing]
>> [music]